README.md, before:

# f007th-rpi
## Raspberry Pi: Receiving data from temperature/humidity sensors with cheap RF receiver
###### Project source can be downloaded from [https://github.com/alex-konshin/f007th-rpi.git](https://github.com/alex-konshin/f007th-rpi.git)

### Author and Contributors
Alex Konshin <akonshin@gmail.com>

### Overview
The main goal of this project is to intercept and decode radio signals from temperature/humidity sensors and show on console or send to REST/InfluxDB servers this received data.

The data is received with cheap RF 433.92MHz receivers like [RXB6](http://www.jmrth.com/en/images/proimages/RXB6_en_v3.pdf), [SeeedStudio RF-R-ASK](https://www.seeedstudio.com/433MHz-ASK%26amp%3BOOK-Super-heterodyne-Receiver-module-p-2205.html), RX-RM-5V, etc. It is tested with RXB6 and SeeedStudio RF-R-ASK.

This project currently supports and tested with following sensors:    
- [Ambient Weather F007TH](http://www.ambientweather.com/amf007th.html)   
- [AcuRite 00592TXR/06002RM](https://www.acurite.com/kbase/592TXR.html)  
- [LaCrosse TX7U](https://www.lacrossetechnology.com/tx7u) (probably TX3/TX6 may also work)  
- [Auriol HG02832 (IAN 283582)](https://manuall.co.uk/auriol-ian-283582-weather-station/)    

### Supported platforms
Following platforms are supported and tested:
- Raspberry Pi 3
- [Banana Pi M3](https://bananapi.gitbooks.io/bpi-m3/content/en/)
- [ODROID C2](http://www.hardkernel.com/main/products/prdt_info.php?g_code=G145457216438&tab_idx=1)
- [MinnowBoard MAX/Turbot](https://www.minnowboard.org/) (tested with [MinnowBoard Turbot QUAD Core Board](https://store.netgate.com/Turbot4.aspx))

##### Raspberry Pi
There are 3 executables on this platform:
- **f007th-rpi** is a demo/test program that receive data from sensors and prints it in plain text or JSON format. This executable requires pigpio library to be installed and should be run as root (via sudo).
- **f007th-rpi_send** is more advanced program that sends received and decoded data to a remote InfluxDB or REST server. This executable requires pigpio library to be installed and should be run as root (via sudo).
- **f007th-send** is the same as above but uses [gpio-ts driver](https://github.com/alex-konshin/gpio-ts). This executable does not require root privileges but [gpio-ts module](https://github.com/alex-konshin/gpio-ts) must be already loaded.

##### Banana Pi M3, ODROID C2, MinnowBoard.
On these platforms only **f007th-send** is supported and tested. This utility sends received and decoded data to a remote InfluxDB or REST server. It does not require root privileges but [gpio-ts module](https://github.com/alex-konshin/gpio-ts) must be already loaded.


### Files
| File | Description |
| :--- | :--- |
| `mach/rpi3.h` | Contains macros that are specific for platform Raspberry Pi 3.|
| `mach/bpi-m3.h` | Contains macros that are specific for platform Banana Pi M3.|
| `mach/odroid-c2.h` | Contains macros that are specific for platform ODROID C2.|
| `mach/x86_64.h` | Contains macros that are specific for platform x86_64 (ex: MinnowBoard).|
| `Bits.hpp` | Operations with long set of bits. It is used for storing decoded bits in Manchester decoder.|
| `F007TH.cpp` | Source code of **f007th-rpi** executable.|
| `f007th_send.cpp` | Source code of **f007th-rpi_send** executable. |
| `ReceivedMessage.hpp` | Container for received and decoded data. |
| `RFReceiver.cpp` | Implementation part of main class `RFReceiver` that actually receives and decodes data. |
| `RFReceiver.hpp` | Declaration part of class `RFReceiver`. |
| `SensorsData.hpp` | Contains the current list of sensors with the latest data. It is used for filtering duplicated data. |
| `Logger.hpp` | Implements functions for logging messages. |
| `makefile,*.mk` | Makefiles generated by Eclipse. They can be used for building executables outside Eclipse as well.
| `README.md` | This file. |

### How to build
There are several ways to do it. I actually cross-build this project in Eclipse on my Windows machine. 
You can look at [this good instruction about setting up Eclipse for cross-compilation](http://www.cososo.co.uk/2015/12/cross-development-using-eclipse-and-gcc-for-the-rpi/).  

##### Building on Raspberry Pi
- You need to install [libcurl library](https://curl.haxx.se/libcurl/).
```
sudo apt-get install libcurl4-openssl-dev
```
- If you want to use [pigpio library](http://abyz.co.uk/rpi/pigpio/index.html) then you need to install it.
```
sudo apt-get install pigpio
```
- Clone sources from GitHub. The following command will create new sub-directory f007th-rpi in the current directory and download sources
```
git clone https://github.com/alex-konshin/f007th-rpi.git
```
- Build
```
/bin/sh f007th-rpi/build.sh
```
- Executables are created in directory `f007th-rpi/bin`. Note that some of them must be run with root privileges (for example with `sudo`). Use Ctrl-C or command kill to terminate utilities.

##### Building on MinnowBoard
- Build [gpio-ts module](https://github.com/alex-konshin/gpio-ts) first.
- Install [libcurl library](https://curl.haxx.se/libcurl/).
```
sudo apt-get install libcurl4-openssl-dev
```
- Clone sources from GitHub. The following command will create new sub-directory f007th-rpi in the current directory and download sources
```

git clone https://github.com/alex-konshin/f007th-rpi.git
```
- Build
```
/bin/bash f007th-rpi/f007th-ts-x86_64/build.sh
```
- Executable file `f007th-send` is created in directory `~/bin`.

### Running f007th-rpi_send or f007th-send
The command can send data to InfluxDB server or virtually any REST server that supports PUT requests.
How to setup these servers? It is out of the scope of this instruction because there are many possible solutions. For REST server I personally use [LoopBack](https://loopback.io/) with [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/) that are run on QNAP NAS server.
 
The command sends JSON to REST server with following fields:  
`"time", "valid", "type", "channel", "rolling_code", "temperature", "humidity","battery_ok"`.  
The value of field `temperature` is integer number of dF ("deciFahrenheit" = 1/10 of Fahrenheit). For example, if the value is 724 then the temperature is 72.4&deg;F. Note that not all fields are always present in each report. 

Instructions for InfluxDB can be found on site [https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/v1.2/introduction/installation/](https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/v1.2/introduction/installation/). The command sends 3 types of metrics: "temperature", "humidity" and "sensor_battery_status" with tags "type" (one of "F007TH", "00592TXR", "TX7", "HG02832"), "channel" and "rolling_code". The value of "temperature" is in Fahrenheit. Note that rolling code is changed when you replace batteries.

#### Command line arguments of utility f007th-rpi_send:
##### --gpio, -g
Value is GPIO pin number (default is 27) as defined on page [http://abyz.co.uk/rpi/pigpio/index.html](http://abyz.co.uk/rpi/pigpio/index.html)
##### --celsius, -C
Output temperature in degrees Celsius.
##### --utc, -U
Timestamps are printed/sent in ISO 8601 format.
##### --local-time, -L
Timestamps are printed/sent in format "YYYY-mm-dd HH:MM:SS TZ".
##### --send-to, -s
Parameter value is server URL.
##### --server-type, -t
Parameter value is server type. Possible values are REST (default) or InfluxDB.
##### --all, -A
Send all data. Only changed and valid data is sent by default.
##### --log-file, -l
Parameter is a path to log file.
##### --verbose, -v
Verbose output.
##### --more_verbose, -V
More verbose output.

#### Examples:
Print received data on console:  
`sudo f007th-rpi_send -A`  
 
Print received data on console with temperature in degrees Celsius:  
`sudo f007th-rpi_send -C -A`  
 
Run the command in background and send data to InfluxDB database `smarthome` on server `server.dom`:  
`f007th-send -t InfluxDB http://server.dom:8086/write?db=smarthome &`  
or  
`f007th-send --type=InfluxDB -s http://server.dom:8086/write?db=smarthome &`  
or  
`f007th-send --type=InfluxDB --send-to http://server.dom:8086/write?db=smarthome &`  
 
Send data to Loopback (REST server) on server `qnap.dom`:  
`f007th-send http://qnap.dom:3000/api/roomtemps`  
or  
`f007th-send -t REST -s http://qnap.dom:3000/api/roomtemps`  

#### Example of wiring RXB6 to Raspberry Pi 3 ####

Raspberry Pi is on the left:  
3.3v (pin 1) <==> +5v/VDD (pin 5)  
GPIO27 (pin 13) <==> DATA (pin 7)  
Ground (pin 25) <==> GND (pin 8)  
![Picture of wiring RXB6 to Raspberry Pi 3](https://github.com/alex-konshin/f007th-rpi/blob/master/RXB6_wiring.JPG)

Commit message:

Added optional HTTP server (option -H)

README.md, after:

# f007th-rpi
## Raspberry Pi: Receiving data from temperature/humidity sensors with cheap RF receiver
###### Project source can be downloaded from [https://github.com/alex-konshin/f007th-rpi.git](https://github.com/alex-konshin/f007th-rpi.git)

### Author and Contributors
Alex Konshin <akonshin@gmail.com>

### Overview
The main goal of this project is to intercept and decode radio signals from temperature/humidity sensors and show on console or send to REST/InfluxDB servers this received data.

The data is received with cheap RF 433.92MHz receivers like [RXB6](http://www.jmrth.com/en/images/proimages/RXB6_en_v3.pdf), [SeeedStudio RF-R-ASK](https://www.seeedstudio.com/433MHz-ASK%26amp%3BOOK-Super-heterodyne-Receiver-module-p-2205.html), RX-RM-5V, etc. It is tested with RXB6 and SeeedStudio RF-R-ASK.

This project currently supports and tested with following sensors:    
- [Ambient Weather F007TH](http://www.ambientweather.com/amf007th.html)   
- [AcuRite 00592TXR/06002RM](https://www.acurite.com/kbase/592TXR.html)  
- [LaCrosse TX7U](https://www.lacrossetechnology.com/tx7u) (probably TX3/TX6 may also work)  
- [Auriol HG02832 (IAN 283582)](https://manuall.co.uk/auriol-ian-283582-weather-station/)    

### Supported platforms
Following platforms are supported and tested:
- Raspberry Pi 3
- [Banana Pi M3](https://bananapi.gitbooks.io/bpi-m3/content/en/)
- [ODROID C2](http://www.hardkernel.com/main/products/prdt_info.php?g_code=G145457216438&tab_idx=1)
- [MinnowBoard MAX/Turbot](https://www.minnowboard.org/) (tested with [MinnowBoard Turbot QUAD Core Board](https://store.netgate.com/Turbot4.aspx))

##### Raspberry Pi
There are 3 executables on this platform:
- **f007th-rpi** is a demo/test program that receive data from sensors and prints it in plain text or JSON format. This executable requires pigpio library to be installed and should be run as root (via sudo).
- **f007th-rpi_send** is more advanced program that sends received and decoded data to a remote InfluxDB or REST server. This executable requires pigpio library to be installed and should be run as root (via sudo).
- **f007th-send** is the same as above but uses [gpio-ts driver](https://github.com/alex-konshin/gpio-ts). This executable does not require root privileges but [gpio-ts module](https://github.com/alex-konshin/gpio-ts) must be already loaded.

##### Banana Pi M3, ODROID C2, MinnowBoard.
On these platforms only **f007th-send** is supported and tested. This utility sends received and decoded data to a remote InfluxDB or REST server. It does not require root privileges but [gpio-ts module](https://github.com/alex-konshin/gpio-ts) must be already loaded.


### Files
| File | Description |
| :--- | :--- |
| `mach/rpi3.h` | Contains macros that are specific for platform Raspberry Pi 3.|
| `mach/bpi-m3.h` | Contains macros that are specific for platform Banana Pi M3.|
| `mach/odroid-c2.h` | Contains macros that are specific for platform ODROID C2.|
| `mach/x86_64.h` | Contains macros that are specific for platform x86_64 (ex: MinnowBoard).|
| `Bits.hpp` | Operations with long set of bits. It is used for storing decoded bits in Manchester decoder.|
| `F007TH.cpp` | Source code of **f007th-rpi** executable.|
| `f007th_send.cpp` | Source code of **f007th-rpi_send** executable. |
| `ReceivedMessage.hpp` | Container for received and decoded data. |
| `RFReceiver.cpp` | Implementation part of main class `RFReceiver` that actually receives and decodes data. |
| `RFReceiver.hpp` | Declaration part of class `RFReceiver`. |
| `SensorsData.hpp` | Contains the current list of sensors with the latest data. It is used for filtering duplicated data. |
| `Logger.hpp` | Implements functions for logging messages. |
| `makefile,*.mk` | Makefiles generated by Eclipse. They can be used for building executables outside Eclipse as well.
| `README.md` | This file. |

### How to build
There are several ways to do it. I actually cross-build this project in Eclipse on my Windows machine. 
You can look at [this good instruction about setting up Eclipse for cross-compilation](http://www.cososo.co.uk/2015/12/cross-development-using-eclipse-and-gcc-for-the-rpi/).  

##### Building on Raspberry Pi
- You need to install [libcurl library](https://curl.haxx.se/libcurl/).
```
sudo apt-get install libcurl4-openssl-dev libmicrohttpd-dev
```
- If you want to use [pigpio library](http://abyz.co.uk/rpi/pigpio/index.html) then you need to install it.
```
sudo apt-get install pigpio
```
- Clone sources from GitHub. The following command will create new sub-directory f007th-rpi in the current directory and download sources
```
git clone https://github.com/alex-konshin/f007th-rpi.git
```
- Build
```
/bin/sh f007th-rpi/build.sh
```
- Executables are created in directory `f007th-rpi/bin`. Note that some of them must be run with root privileges (for example with `sudo`). Use Ctrl-C or command kill to terminate utilities.

##### Building on MinnowBoard
- Build [gpio-ts module](https://github.com/alex-konshin/gpio-ts) first.
- Install [libcurl library](https://curl.haxx.se/libcurl/).
```
sudo apt-get install libcurl4-openssl-dev libmicrohttpd-dev
```
- Clone sources from GitHub. The following command will create new sub-directory f007th-rpi in the current directory and download sources
```

git clone https://github.com/alex-konshin/f007th-rpi.git
```
- Build
```
/bin/bash f007th-rpi/f007th-ts-x86_64/build.sh
```
- Executable file `f007th-send` is created in directory `~/bin`.

### Running f007th-rpi_send or f007th-send
The command can send data to InfluxDB server or virtually any REST server that supports PUT requests.
How to setup these servers? It is out of the scope of this instruction because there are many possible solutions. For REST server I personally use [LoopBack](https://loopback.io/) with [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/) that are run on QNAP NAS server.
 
The command sends JSON to REST server with following fields:  
`"time", "valid", "type", "channel", "rolling_code", "temperature", "humidity","battery_ok"`.  
The value of field `temperature` is integer number of dF ("deciFahrenheit" = 1/10 of Fahrenheit). For example, if the value is 724 then the temperature is 72.4&deg;F. Note that not all fields are always present in each report. 

Instructions for InfluxDB can be found on site [https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/v1.2/introduction/installation/](https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/v1.2/introduction/installation/). The command sends 3 types of metrics: "temperature", "humidity" and "sensor_battery_status" with tags "type" (one of "F007TH", "00592TXR", "TX7", "HG02832"), "channel" and "rolling_code". The value of "temperature" is in Fahrenheit. Note that rolling code is changed when you replace batteries.

#### Command line arguments of utility f007th-rpi_send:
##### --gpio, -g
Value is GPIO pin number (default is 27) as defined on page [http://abyz.co.uk/rpi/pigpio/index.html](http://abyz.co.uk/rpi/pigpio/index.html)
##### --celsius, -C
Output temperature in degrees Celsius.
##### --utc, -U
Timestamps are printed/sent in ISO 8601 format.
##### --local-time, -L
Timestamps are printed/sent in format "YYYY-mm-dd HH:MM:SS TZ".
##### --send-to, -s
Parameter value is server URL.
##### --server-type, -t
Parameter value is server type. Possible values are REST (default) or InfluxDB.
##### --all, -A
Send all data. Only changed and valid data is sent by default.
##### --log-file, -l
Parameter is a path to log file.
##### --httpd, -H
Run HTTPD server on the specified port. If this option is specified then the utility will serve HTTP requests on this port. Currently it just sends JSON with current values from all sensors.    
##### --verbose, -v
Verbose output.
##### --more_verbose, -V
More verbose output.

#### Examples:
Print received data on console:  
`sudo f007th-rpi_send -A`  
 
Print received data on console with temperature in degrees Celsius:  
`sudo f007th-rpi_send -C -A`  
 
Run the command in background and send data to InfluxDB database `smarthome` on server `server.dom`:  
`f007th-send -t InfluxDB http://server.dom:8086/write?db=smarthome &`  
or  
`f007th-send --type=InfluxDB -s http://server.dom:8086/write?db=smarthome &`  
or  
`f007th-send --type=InfluxDB --send-to http://server.dom:8086/write?db=smarthome &`  
 
Send data to Loopback (REST server) on server `qnap.dom`:  
`f007th-send http://qnap.dom:3000/api/roomtemps`  
or  
`f007th-send -t REST -s http://qnap.dom:3000/api/roomtemps`  

#### Example of wiring RXB6 to Raspberry Pi 3 ####

Raspberry Pi is on the left:  
3.3v (pin 1) <==> +5v/VDD (pin 5)  
GPIO27 (pin 13) <==> DATA (pin 7)  
Ground (pin 25) <==> GND (pin 8)  
![Picture of wiring RXB6 to Raspberry Pi 3](https://github.com/alex-konshin/f007th-rpi/blob/master/RXB6_wiring.JPG)
